feat(blog): Quickstart tutorials revamp (#7630)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2024/11/04/2024-11-04-jenkins-tutorial-revamp.adoc

video::jVOpNnOXr_s[youtube,width=839]

Did you notice how much scrolling was required on the right side?
It was like a never-ending story.
And did you see the amount of code users had to copy-paste?
While we'll always need a certain quantity of code for the Jenkins pipeline itself, the setup process should be as simple as possible.
That wasn't the case with the old tutorials.

=== Breaking Down the Issues

Our old tutorials, while comprehensive, presented several significant challenges:

1. *Overwhelming complexity*: Users were bombarded with Docker commands before they could even start learning about Jenkins.
The tutorial assumed users were Docker gurus, throwing commands at them like there's no tomorrow.

2. *Assumptions about user knowledge*: The tutorials assumed a high level of Docker expertise.
But let me ask you this: how many of you knew Docker really well the first time you tried Jenkins?
That's not a fair expectation.

3. *Lengthy setup process*: A significant portion of the tutorial was dedicated to setup rather than learning Jenkins itself.
We were spending more time with Docker than with Jenkins!

> 4. *Reliance on outdated tools*: We were heavily dependent on the deprecated BlueOcean plugin, which was no longer recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. *Reliance on outdated tools*: We were heavily dependent on the deprecated Blue Ocean plugin, which was no longer recommended.
```
Just a small space to separate the name.

5. *Docker in Docker*: The old tutorial used Docker in Docker, which is considered a bad practice from a security standpoint.

6. *Lack of context*: The tutorials often lacked explanations for why certain steps were necessary, leaving users to blindly follow instructions without understanding.

Here's a snippet from the old Maven tutorial to illustrate these points:

[source,bash]
----
docker network create jenkins
docker run \
  --name jenkins-docker \
  --rm \
  --detach \
  --privileged \
  --network jenkins \
  --network-alias docker \
  --env DOCKER_TLS_CERTDIR=/certs \
  --volume jenkins-docker-certs:/certs/client \
  --volume jenkins-data:/var/jenkins_home \
  --publish 2376:2376 \
  docker:dind \
  --storage-driver overlay2
----

This command, while functional, is overwhelming for beginners and lacks context.
Why do we need a Docker network?
Why are we running Docker in Docker?
These questions were left unanswered.

== The Solution: Revamping with Docker Compose

> After much deliberation and feedback, we decided to leverage Docker Compose to simplify the entire setup process. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After much deliberation and feedback, we decided to leverage link:https://docs.docker.com/compose/intro/compose-application-model/[Docker Compose] to simplify the entire setup process. 
```
The link could be added here to provide resources to the reader. Not necessary to implement though.

=== Why Docker Compose?

Docker Compose can encapsulate complex multi-container setups into a single, easy-to-understand file.

> It was the only tool that could handle the complexity of the Jenkins controller and agent setup while making it accessible to newcomers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is the only tool that can handle the complexity of the Jenkins controller and agent setup while making it accessible to newcomers.
```
Updating to present tense usage.

Here's an example of how Docker Compose simplifies things:

[source,yaml]
----
services:
  jenkins:
    image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    volumes:
      - jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home
  agent:
    image: jenkins/ssh-agent:jdk17
    environment:
      - JENKINS_AGENT_SSH_PUBKEY=<your_public_key>
volumes:
  jenkins_home:
----

With this setup, users can start Jenkins and an agent with a single command: `docker compose up -d`.

=== Key Improvements

1. *Simplified setup*: Instead of a series of complex Docker commands, users can now get started with a single Docker Compose command.

2. *Reduced assumptions*: By encapsulating the setup in Docker Compose, we removed the need for extensive Docker knowledge.

3. *Focus on Jenkins*: With a streamlined setup, users can dive into learning Jenkins faster.

> 4. *Modernized tools*: We replaced outdated plugins like BlueOcean with more current solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. *Modernized tools*: We replaced outdated plugins like Blue Ocean with more current solutions.
```
Same as previous suggestion, space to format name.

6. *Contextual guidance*: We've added explanations for each step, helping users understand why they're performing certain actions.

== The Process: Collaboration and Innovation

This revamp was a collaborative effort, with significant contributions from our Google Summer of Code participant, author:ash-sxn[Ashutosh Saxena].
His fresh perspective as a newcomer to Jenkins was invaluable in identifying pain points that we, as experienced developers, had overlooked.

=== Key Innovations

1. *Multi-architecture support*: We ensured our Docker images work on both `x86_64` and `ARM64` architectures.
This was a significant challenge that Ashutosh tackled using Docker's `buildx` tool.

2. *GitPod integration*: We made Jenkins accessible directly from the browser, reducing hardware barriers to entry.
This was particularly important for users with less powerful machines or those in environments with limited resources.

3. *Docker Compose profiles*: We introduced profiles for different languages and technologies, making it easy to switch between setups.
For example, users can start a Maven-specific setup with `docker compose --profile maven up -d`.

> 4. *Automated updates*: We implemented automation to keep our Docker images up-to-date, using tools like Dependabot and UpdateCLI.

Reviewer 2: When I'm curious about a first mention of a technology, I like it when there is a hyperlink that tells me more.
```suggestion
4. *Automated updates*: We implemented automation to keep our Docker images up-to-date, using tools like link:https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/dependabot[Dependabot] and link:https://www.updatecli.io/[UpdateCLI].
```

Thanks to GitPod integration, Jenkins is now just a click away, even on less powerful devices.
This cloud-based approach brings several key advantages for accessibility and ease of use:

. _*One-Click Setup*_: The repository's `README` contains a link:https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/jenkins-docs/quickstart-tutorials[GitPod link] that launches Jenkins instantly.
With the GitPod Chrome extension installed, you'll see a prominent green button that makes the process even smoother.
. _*Resource-Friendly*_: GitPod provides 50 hours of free monthly usage, making Jenkins accessible to users regardless of their local hardware capabilities.
. _*Bandwidth Optimization*_: Since GitPod handles the heavy lifting of downloading Docker images, users can get started quickly even with limited internet connectivity - whether they're working from a train, a remote location, or a region with restricted bandwidth.
. _*Familiar Development Environment*_: Users get instant access to a Visual Studio Code-like IDE and terminal, complete with clear instructions for their chosen tutorial.

Here's a quick demonstration of the GitPod integration in action:

video::WsH7yL5chow[youtube,width=839]

> As you can see, users have some instructions, and a command to copy-paste in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, users have some instructions and a command to copy-paste in the terminal.
```
Small punctuation adjustment

After pasting the command in the terminal, the setup process begins automatically.
Docker images are pulled efficiently through GitPod's infrastructure, preserving your local bandwidth.
The Jenkins controller and agent containers are launched, and a browser tab automatically opens to display the Jenkins interface.
The entire process takes less than a minute - a significant improvement over traditional setup methods.

> Since we've streamlined the authentication process, you can log in immediately using the credentials admin/admin and begin your Jenkins journey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we've streamlined the authentication process, you can log in immediately using the credentials (`admin`/`admin`) and begin your Jenkins journey.
```
Suggestion to update the credentials so they match how they are shown in line 199

video::oEcreaxR6MQ[youtube,width=839]

Expanding the window reveals the full Jenkins interface.
Upon logging in with the tutorial credentials (`admin`/`admin`), you'll immediately notice several key features: a pre-configured job and an active agent visible in the left sidebar.

> This job, while simple, serves an important purpose—it demonstrates that both your Jenkins controller is operational and the agent is properly connected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This job, while simple, serves an important purpose — it demonstrates that both your Jenkins controller is operational and the agent is properly connected.
```
Suggestion for spacing.

Navigating to "_`Manage Jenkins`_" shows that all plugins are current, eliminating any need for initial administrative setup.
The bottom right corner displays the current Jenkins LTS version (`2.462.2` at the time of recording), confirming you're working with the latest stable release.
This streamlined environment allows users to focus entirely on learning Jenkins, without getting caught up in configuration details.

> The entire setup process, from start to finish, takes less than two minutes and requires no local installation—perfectly aligned with our goal of making Jenkins more accessible to everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entire setup process, from start to finish, takes less than two minutes and requires no local installation — perfectly aligned with our goal of making Jenkins more accessible to everyone.
```
Similar suggestion for spacing.

video::pEaWpCm1xLU[youtube,width=839]

The GitPod terminal output illustrates another key innovation: our implementation of Docker Compose profiles for various programming languages and technologies.

> This feature exemplifies our commitment to simplicity—switching between different technology stacks, whether Maven, Python, or Node.js, requires only a single command: `docker compose --profile maven up -d`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature exemplifies our commitment to simplicity — switching between different technology stacks, whether Maven, Python, or Node.js, requires only a single command: `docker compose --profile maven up -d`.
```
Similar suggestion for spacing

The system handles all the complexity behind the scenes, delivering a seamless experience that lets developers focus on learning Jenkins rather than wrestling with configuration.

This streamlined approach reflects our broader commitment to inclusivity.
Through multi-architecture support and browser-based accessibility via GitPod, we've created an environment where developers of all experience levels and technical resources can engage with Jenkins effectively.

=== 3. Flexible Configurations

> Docker Compose profiles allow easy switching between different tech stacks. Whether you're working with Maven, Python, or Node.js, you can start the appropriate environment with a simple profile switch.

Reviewer 2: Sentence per line is preferred for easier review
```suggestion
Docker Compose profiles allow easy switching between different tech stacks.
Whether you're working with Maven, Python, or Node.js, you can start the appropriate environment with a simple profile switch.
```

=== 4. Up-to-date and Secure

By eliminating Docker in Docker and implementing automated updates, we've made the tutorials more secure and easier to maintain.

== The Impact: Before and After

The impact of these changes has been significant and far-reaching:

> 1. *Increased adoption*: Our Docker images have been downloaded over 26,000 times since launch. We've seen multiple forks of the project, with people using it to create their own Jenkins instances for other technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. *Increased adoption*: Our Docker images have been downloaded over 26,000 times since launch.
We've seen multiple forks of the project, with people using it to create their own Jenkins instances for other technologies.
```
Single line per sentence suggestion

2. *Educational benefits*: University professors have incorporated these tutorials into their CI/CD curricula.
One teacher reported that his students, most of whom had never used Jenkins before, were able to get up and running in minutes.
The simplification helped them focus on learning Jenkins rather than fighting with the setup process.

3. *Community engagement*: We've seen regular clones and forks of the repository, indicating active use of our tutorials.
Referrals come not just from jenkins.io, but also from Reddit, Medium, and Google searches.

> 4. *Unexpected benefits*: The new setup has even facilitated testing of major Jenkins upgrades. For example, it's being used to test the ongoing migration to Spring Security 6.x and Spring Framework 6.x. This allows anyone to launch transitional versions of Jenkins with one command and provide valuable feedback on the progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. *Unexpected benefits*: The new setup has even facilitated testing of major Jenkins upgrades.
For example, it's being used to test the ongoing migration to Spring Security 6.x and Spring Framework 6.x.
This allows anyone to launch transitional versions of Jenkins with one command and provide valuable feedback on the progress.
```
Single line per sentence suggestion

== The Future: Call to Action

While we've made significant strides, our work is far from over.
We're constantly looking for ways to improve Jenkins, and that's where you come in.
Whether you're a seasoned developer or a complete newcomer, your feedback and contributions are invaluable.

We encourage you to:

> 1. Try out link:/doc/tutorials/#tools[the new tutorials]
> 2. link:https://github.com/jenkins-docs/quickstart-tutorials/issues[Provide feedback] on your experience
> 3. Contribute ideas or code to further improve the tutorials
> 4. link:https://community.jenkins.io/[Share your experience] with the community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Try out link:/doc/tutorials/#tools[the new tutorials].
2. link:https://github.com/jenkins-docs/quickstart-tutorials/issues[Provide feedback] on your experience.
3. Contribute ideas or code to further improve the tutorials.
4. link:https://community.jenkins.io/[Share your experience] with the community.
```
Suggestion to add punctuation.

Remember, Jenkins is a community-driven project.
Your input shapes its future!

=== Upcoming Improvements

We're already planning the next phase of improvements:

> 1. Expanding the range of technology-specific profiles
> 2. Further refining the GitPod experience
> 3. Exploring integration with other cloud development environments
> 4. Continuously updating our documentation to reflect best practices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Expanding the range of technology-specific profiles.
2. Further refining the GitPod experience.
3. Exploring integration with other cloud development environments.
4. Continuously updating our documentation to reflect best practices.
```
Suggestion to add punctuation.
